---
curso: REDES
titulo: 05 - Semana 3 _ LAB1B_DNS + ExcLAB1/LAB1B_DNS_Part2
slides: 5
fuente: 05 - Semana 3 _ LAB1B_DNS + ExcLAB1/LAB1B_DNS_Part2.pdf
---

  {garias,cwilliams}@utec.edu.pe
  CS4055: Networks and communications
   2026-04-08




                               LAB2B - DNS


The present evaluation will be received only if the checkpoints of all the questions in
the LABORATORY SESSION have been completed with the course teacher.
  I.​   The submission must consist of:
           A.​ Introduction (include introductory paragraph):
           B.​ Theoretical Framework (definitions with references).
           C.​ State of the Art (research papers, articles, theses, pages with references).
           D.​ Development of the experience (including discussion and correct figure
              formatting)
           E.​ Conclusions (at least one for each experience carried out).
           F.​ References (IEEE format)
 II.​   The submission must be presented in LaTeX or Docs format (pdf file).
III.​   Upload only the PDF of the report to Canvas, use a link to the repository, include
        step-by-step photos of each experience and answer checkpoints where relevant,
        plus codes if they have been developed.
IV.​    Only one member of the group will upload the report.
 V.​    Do not forget to list the names of all members.
 {garias,cwilliams}@utec.edu.pe
 CS4055: Networks and communications
  2026-04-08


                            LAB1 - DNS - Part 2

4. DNS lookup using the nslookup command on mail servers

4.1. Instructions:
  ●​ At the command prompt type the nslookup command. (Windows).
  ●​ In the input request (>), type set type=mx in order to use nslookup to identify mail
     servers.
  ●​ In the inbound request, type the different four domains.
                cisco.com                                       google.com​
             utec.edu.pe                                        gmail.com
  ●​ The mail server with the lowest MX preference value is contacted first.
     Depending on the result you get, answer the following:


4.2. Answer
  ●​ Which server will be contacted first when sending email to cisco.com?
  ●​ Perform the same experience for gmail.com which server will be contacted first
     when email is sent to gmail.com?
  ●​ At the nslookup prompt, type exit to return to the normal PC command prompt. At
     the PC's command prompt, type
                                   ipconfig /all
  ●​ Write down the IP addresses of all DNS servers used by the university.
  ●​ Now do the same experience with one of the domains, but adding the www prefix​
     (F.E. for www.cisco.com), does it give a different response? Can you determine
     which server will be contacted first when sending email to this domain? Explain.


                               Checkpoint 4

5. DNS Tracing with Wireshark I - Browsing

5.1. Instructions
We will begin by capturing DNS messages that are generated through ordinary web
browsing activity.
  ●​ First, clear your host's DNS cache, as described above.
 {garias,cwilliams}@utec.edu.pe
 CS4055: Networks and communications
  2026-04-08

  ●​ Open your browser and clear its cache.
  ●​ Open Wireshark and enter “dns” into the display filter. This filter will allow
  ●​ Wireshark to only display packets related to DNS requests.
  ●​ Start capturing packets in Wireshark.
  ●​ Using your browser, visit any of the following websites:
                                      www.ietf.org
                                    www.google.com
                                     www.cisco.com
                                   www.utec.edu.pe
  ●​ Stop the packet capture.


5.2. Answer
  1.​ Analyze and explain how a DNS request is structured using Wireshark.
  2.​ To which IP address is the DNS query message sent?​
     Examine the DNS query message. How many "questions" does this DNS message
     contain? How many "answers" does it contain?
                                Checkpoint 5

6. Tracing DNS with Wireshark II - Nslookup
Now let’s play with nslookup.
  ●​ Start packet capture using Wireshark.
  ●​ Do an
                                nslookup www.mit.edu
  ●​ Stop packet capture.
You should get a trace that looks something like the following:
 {garias,cwilliams}@utec.edu.pe
 CS4055: Networks and communications
  2026-04-08




We see from the above screenshot that nslookup actually sent three DNS queries and
received three DNS responses. For the purpose of this assignment, in answering the
following questions, ignore the first two sets of queries/responses, as they are specific to
nslookup and are not normally generated by standard Internet applications. You should
instead focus on the last query and response messages.


6.1. Answer the following questions :
  1.​ What is the destination port for the DNS query message? What is the source port of
     DNS response message?
  2.​ To what IP address is the DNS query message sent? Is this the IP address of your
     default local DNS server?
  3.​ Examine the DNS query message. What “Type” of DNS query is it? Does the query
     message contain any “answers”?
  4.​ Examine the DNS response message. How many “answers” are provided? What do
     each of these answers contain?
  5.​ Provide a screenshot.
 {garias,cwilliams}@utec.edu.pe
 CS4055: Networks and communications
  2026-04-08

Now repeat the previous experiment, but instead issue the command:
                           nslookup –type=NS mit.edu
  6.​ To what IP address is the DNS query message sent? Is this the IP address of your
     default local DNS server?
  7.​ Examine the DNS query message. What “Type” of DNS query is it? Does the query
     message contain any “answers”?
  8.​ Examine the DNS response message. What MIT nameservers does the response
     message provide? Does this response message also provide the IP addresses of the
     MIT namesers?
  9.​ Provide a screenshot.
Now repeat the previous experiment, but instead issue the command:
                   nslookup www.aiit.or.kr bitsy.mit.edu
  10.​To what IP address is the DNS query message sent? Is this the IP address of your
     default local DNS server? If not, what does the IP address correspond to?
  11.​ Examine the DNS query message. What “Type” of DNS query is it? Does the query
     message contain any “answers”?
  12.​Examine the DNS response message. How many “answers” are provided? What
     does each of these answers contain?
  13.​Provide a screenshot.
                                 Checkpoint 6

7. For the report (Block Diagram):
Research how domain registration is carried out in Peru for the following domains:
“.pe”, “.edu”, and “.com”. Then explain the procedure using a block diagram.
